(sakuli/todo#145) Add 2.3.0 release notes (#29)
sakuli/docs: content/change_notes/2.3.0.md

For this release, we spent some time on investigating the root cause for these issues. Now Sakuli click actions perform
several technical validations e.g. whether the element to click is visible, before the actual click is performed. If one of
these checks fails, an error will be thrown. On some websites, these strict checks might fail the technical validation.
For those cases, it is still possible to avoid all technical checks and validation by passing the configuration object `{force: true}` to the click action.

{{<highlight javascript>}}
_click(_button("Click Me"), {force: true}); // clicks without validation
{{</highlight>}}

_Please note that a forced click might lead to false positives, as no validation takes place._  
For more information, please have a look at the 
[_click() API documentation](https://sakuli.io/apidoc/sakuli-legacy/interfaces/legacyapi.html#_click).

### Improved CLI error messages
We improved the error messages of the CLI output. You will now receive detailed information about syntax errors
in test scripts as well as more detailed information on the root cause for errors. 

### Optional website stabilization

> Many modern websites use visual effects regularly. Such effects have impaired test setups during the last months. Some users compensated such situations by using `_wait()` with a fixed timeout. Depending on the system the checks are running on, we have observed that a strict `_wait()` is not reliable. Therefore we added `_pageIsStable()` to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many modern websites use visual effects regularly. Such effects have impaired test setups in the past. Some users compensated such situations by using `_wait()` with a fixed timeout. Depending on the system the checks are running on, we have observed that a strict `_wait()` is not reliable. Therefore we added `_pageIsStable()` to the
```

Sakuli API. `_pageIsStable()` allows you to wait until the DOM of your website has stabilized e.g. after animations are finished or dynamic content has been loaded. As soon as the DOM is stable, test execution continues. It is possible to
configure the maximum timeout to wait and even the intervals in which the DOM is checked.

{{<highlight javascript>}}
// Wait for the DOM to stabilize within a maximum 5 seconds and check in an interval of 100 milliseconds.
await _pageIsStable(5000, 100);
{{</highlight>}}

For more information, please have a look at the
[_pageIsStable() API documentation](https://sakuli.io/apidoc/sakuli-legacy/interfaces/commonactionsapi.html#_pageisstable).

## Enterprise packages
### Sakuli Prometheus forwarder

> With 2.3.0, we have added a Prometheus forwarder to the enterprise forwarder packages. To use the Prometheus forwarder, a valid Sakuli enterprise license is required. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With 2.3.0, we have added a [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) forwarder to the enterprise forwarder packages. To use the Prometheus forwarder, a valid Sakuli enterprise license is required. 
```

As Sakuli checks are not designed to provide a persistent endpoint for Prometheus to scrape, the forwarder leverages the Prometheus push gateway. For more information about configuration and setup, please have a look at the [Prometheus forwarder documentation](https://sakuli.io/docs/enterprise_features/prometheus/).

### CheckMK forwarder - Website link in spool files
From now on, Sakuli allows to add an optional website URL to the CheckMK spool files. These URLs will be displayed in the CheckMK Web Interface which allows an easy access for the monitoring staff to systems under test in case of an error.

For more information, please have a look at the [CheckMK forwarder documentation](https://sakuli.io/docs/enterprise_features/check/#forwarder-configuration).

### Sakuli Container

> As usual, we updated the container to use the latest Sakuli version and also added node 12 as well as all changes to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As usual, we updated the container to use the latest Sakuli version, latest security patches and also added node 12 as well as all changes to the
```

---
title: "V2.3.0"
date:  2020-03-17T10:28:41+01:00
weight: 1
---
# V2.3.0

Sakuli V2.3.0 comes with a lot of improvements in performance and stability as well as with a lot of bug fixes and a
completely new forwarder integration. Let's have a look at the major changes for this release.

## Sakuli Core
Beside Node 12 support and a bunch of changes Sakuli click actions, we've improved the CLI output

> in case of check/test failure and added options to ensure a stable website before performing any action.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Besides node 12 support and adjustments in Sakuli click actions, we've improved CLI output in case of check/test failures and added ways to ensure a stable website before performing any action.
```

A detailed list of all applied enhancement and fixes can be found in the
[CHANGELOG.md](https://github.com/sakuli/sakuli/blob/develop/CHANGELOG.md).

### Node 12
From now on, Sakuli supports Node 12. This requires the client systems to update to Node 12 as well, to be
compatible with the current release. If you use the enterprise container, we already did that for you. The only thing

> you'd have to do is to update to the 2.3.0 container.

Reviewer 2: It's not a hard requirement to upgrade to node 12 to continue using Sakuli. Maybe this could keep some people from updating b/c they feel pressured to update their whole stack?

```suggestion
From now on, Sakuli also supports the current LTS version of node (v12.x, codename `lts/erbium`), so feel free to upgrade your systems to latest LTS.
We updated our enterprise containers accordingly, so starting with 2.3.0 they are now running on `lts/erbium`.
```

### Changes on `_click()` functionality
A lot of effort has been invested to stabilize the click functionality on websites. In modern web, often
custom implementation are in place which make it hard for Sakuli to perform click actions on buttons, links, etc.
Until now, we advised to switch to the native desktop interaction to perform clicks without using the webdriver interface.
We investigated some of these cases and applied changes to solve these issues. Now Sakulis click action performs
several technical validations e.g. whether the element to click is visible, before the actual click is performed. If one of
these checks fails, an error will be thrown. When testing websites using certain technology, the strict checks
might cause errors, even if the element to click is visible to the end user because it fails technical validation. For those
cases, it is now possible to avoid all technical checks and validation by passing the configuration object `{force: true}`

> to the click action.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A lot of effort went into stabilizing the click functionality on websites. 
Clicking a web element might sound trivial at first, but being as heterogenous as it is, the web allows for quite a few edge cases.
Depending on the implementation it might be hard for Sakuli to reliably perform click actions on buttons, links, etc.
Until now, we advised to switch to native desktop interactions in such cases to perform clicks without using the webdriver interface.
For this release, we spent some time on investigating the root cause for these issues. Now Sakuli click actions perform
several technical validations e.g. whether the element to click is visible, before the actual click is performed. If one of
these checks fails, an error will be thrown. On some websites, these strict checks might fail the technical validation.
For those cases, it is still possible to avoid all technical checks and validation by passing the configuration object `{force: true}` to the click action.
```

_click(_button("Click Me"), {force: true}); // clicks without validation
{{</highlight>}}

_Please note that a forced click might lead to false positives, as no validation takes place._  
For more information, please have a look at the 
[_click() API documentation](https://sakuli.io/apidoc/sakuli-legacy/interfaces/legacyapi.html#_click).

### Improved CLI error messages
We improved the error messages of the CLI output. You will now receive detailed information about syntax errors
in test scripts as well as more detailed information on the root cause for errors. 

### Optional website stabilization
Many modern websites use visual effects regularly. Those effects have impaired some automation during the last months.
Some users compensated such situations by using `_wait()` with fixed times to wait. Depending on the system the checks 
run on, we have observed that a strict `_wait()` is not reliable. Therefore we have added `_pageIsStable()` to the
Sakuli API. `_pageIsStable()` allows you to wait until the DOM of your website has stabilized e.g. after animations or
dynamic content, loaded via JavaScript. As soon as the DOM is stable, test execution continues. It is possible to

> configure the maximum timeout to wait and even the intervals in which the DOM is checked.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Many modern websites use visual effects regularly. Such effects have impaired test setups during the last months. Some users compensated such situations by using `_wait()` with a fixed timeout. Depending on the system the checks are running on, we have observed that a strict `_wait()` is not reliable. Therefore we added `_pageIsStable()` to the
Sakuli API. `_pageIsStable()` allows you to wait until the DOM of your website has stabilized e.g. after animations are finished or dynamic content has been loaded. As soon as the DOM is stable, test execution continues. It is possible to
configure the maximum timeout to wait and even the intervals in which the DOM is checked.
```

{{<highlight javascript>}}
// Wait for the DOM to stabilize within a maximum 5 seconds and check in an interval of 100 milliseconds.
await _pageIsStable(5000, 100);
{{</highlight>}}

For more information, please have a look at the
[_pageIsStable() API documentation](https://sakuli.io/apidoc/sakuli-legacy/interfaces/commonactionsapi.html#_pageisstable).

## Enterprise packages
### Sakuli Prometheus forwarder
With 2.3.0, we have added a prometheus forwarder to the enterprise forwarder packages. To use the prometheus forwarder,
a valid Sakuli enterprise license is required. As Sakuli checks are not designed to provide a persistent endpoint for
Prometheus to scrape, the forwarder leverages the prometheus push gateway. For more information about
configuration and setup, please have a look at the

> [prometheus forwarder documentation](https://sakuli.io/docs/enterprise_features/prometheus/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With 2.3.0, we have added a Prometheus forwarder to the enterprise forwarder packages. To use the Prometheus forwarder, a valid Sakuli enterprise license is required. 

As Sakuli checks are not designed to provide a persistent endpoint for Prometheus to scrape, the forwarder leverages the Prometheus push gateway. For more information about configuration and setup, please have a look at the [Prometheus forwarder documentation](https://sakuli.io/docs/enterprise_features/prometheus/).
```

### CheckMK forwarder - Website link in spool files
From now on, Sakuli 2 adds an optional website URL to the CheckMK spool files as it did in Version 1.x.x . These URLs
will then be displayed in the CheckMK Web Interface which allows an easy access for the monitoring staff to systems 
under test in case of an error. For more information, please have a look at the

> [CheckMK forwarder documentation](https://sakuli.io/docs/enterprise_features/check/#forwarder-configuration).

Reviewer 2: Sakuli 1 did not provide this functionality out of the box. It was only possible due to @tnobody's hacking skills 😃 

```suggestion
From now on, Sakuli allows to add an optional website URL to the CheckMK spool files. These URLs will be displayed in the CheckMK Web Interface which allows an easy access for the monitoring staff to systems under test in case of an error.

For more information, please have a look at the [CheckMK forwarder documentation](https://sakuli.io/docs/enterprise_features/check/#forwarder-configuration).
```

Author: Ah, good to know.

### Sakuli Container
As usual, we updated the container to use the latest Sakuli version and also added Node 12 as well as all changes to the
enterprise forwarders. Beside that, we have created a completely new container which aims to control remote
Windows machines via RDP. The new image can be found in the enterprise repository on docker hub under 
`taconsol/sakuli-remote-connection`.  
_To be able to use the new `taconsol/sakuli-remote-connection` image, a valid Sakuli enterprise licence of

> **L** level or higher is required._

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As usual, we updated the container to use the latest Sakuli version and also added node 12 as well as all changes to the
enterprise forwarders. Besides that, we created a completely new container which aims to control remote Windows machines via RDP. The new image can be found in the enterprise repository on docker hub under 
`taconsol/sakuli-remote-connection`. 

_To be able to use the new `taconsol/sakuli-remote-connection` image, a valid Sakuli enterprise licence of
**L** level or higher is required._
```
